# Poetry

Poetry is a tool for managing Python dependencies and virtual environments. 
It allows you to declare the libraries your project depends on and it will manage (install/update) them for you. Poetry offers a lockfile to ensure repeatable installs, and can build your project for distribution.

Poetry is multi-platform but requires Python 3.9+.

## Installation

- On **Windows**:
```powershell
(Invoke-WebRequest -Uri https://install.python-poetry.org -UseBasicParsing).Content | python -
```

- On **Linux/MacOS**:
```bash
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
```

Close your terminal, then re-open it and verify the installation with:
```bash
poetry --version
```

## Virtual Environment

Poetry automatically creates and manages a virtual environment for each project.

It can be used by running `poetry run` before each command.  
This allows poetry to run the commands directly inside the virtual environment.

Here is an example:
```bash
poetry run python main.py
```


## Project Files: `pyproject.toml` and `poetry.lock`.

### [`pyproject.toml`](../pyproject.toml)

This file is the core configuration of the project. It contains:
- Project metadata (name, version, authors, description…)
- Dependencies under `[tool.poetry.dependencies]`
- Development dependencies under `[tool.poetry.group.dev.dependencies]`
- The build-system configuration (usually Poetry Core)

It can be updated manually or via commands such as:

```bash
poetry add numpy
poetry add --group dev pytest
```

### [`poetry.lock`](../poetry.lock)

This file is auto-generated by Poetry. It should **never** be edited manually.

It stores the exact versions of every dependency and sub-dependency, ensuring the same environment can be recreated on any machine.

Poetry uses it to install the precise versions listed inside it when running:
```bash
poetry install
```
